Remove shards per gb of heap guidance (#86223)
elastic/elasticsearch: docs/reference/how-to/size-your-shards.asciidoc

heap memory.

Every mapped field also carries some overhead in terms of memory usage and disk
space. While the exact amount resource usage of each additional field depends

> on the type of field, an additional 1024B in memory use  for each additional

Author: ++ adjusted

> on the type of field, an additional 512 bytes in memory use  for each additional

Reviewer: 512b seems tight, is that a worst-case guarantee? Even in 8.2? I think we can afford to be a bit conservative with the recommendation here.

Author: It's quite conservative for 8.3 I'd say. it's ~4x what a heap dump for Beats indices would suggest in 8.3. 8.2 is probably about twice as expensive (this is only sorta true and depends on the field type).
=> how about 1kb per field then to have a nice round number?

mapped field on data nodes is a good approximation in most cases.
As a result, the more mapped fields you have per index, the fewer

> indices and shards each individual data node will be able to hold,

Reviewer: Similarly here, could we expose relevant metrics in nodes stats?

Author: Yea, as with mapping stats this should be quite straight forward actually

Reviewer: Similarly, see #86639

> As a result, the more fields the mappings in your indices contain, the fewer
> indices and shards will each individual data node be able to hold,

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
As a result, the more mapped fields per index, the fewer
indices and shards can be held on each individual data node,
```

Author: ++ added a verb to this though

all other things being equal. In addition to the per field overhead you should

> at least have an additional 512MB of heap available per data node.

Reviewer 2: I think this moves a proportion of our customers from inside to outside our recommendations, which I think is not the purpose here. I suggest to rephrase to something like:

In addition to the per field overhead you should have heap available for the base Elasticsearch heap usage as well as the heap usage of the workload. For a small workload, 512MB of heap in addition to the per field overhead suffice in many cases. For tight workloads, it is possible to go even lower.

Author: ++ reworded to your suggestion

> at least have an additional 512Mb of heap available per data node.

Reviewer: nit: bytes not bits

```suggestion
at least have an additional 512MB of heap available per data node.
```

Also is that 512MiB enough for everything else the node might need to do, or is that just enough for it to survive? It sounds pretty tight, maybe we need some more caveats here.

Reviewer 2: On the flip side of that is that running with a few indices with few fields on a 512MB heap with small workload is perfectly possible too. So either the limit need to be lower or a less tight wording than "at least".

Author: The idea was that the 512B above was chosen conservative enough that any additional overheads are covered. In the end 512M is plenty for just data node operations IMO if we have 0.5k/field and especially so if we go with 1k/field.
Maybe add caveats for when the data node is used for ingest and/or coordination? (it's hard to put numbers on either but we could just warn about them in general?)

Reviewer: The circuit breakers that apply to data node operations don't really take the shards-and-fields overhead into account tho, e.g. the fielddata and request breakers just act as if it's ok to use 40% and 60% of the total heap respectively. In the example here, 80% of the heap is already consumed with shards-and-fields overhead, so really (with the real-memory CB) there's only 15% left for doing any useful work.

Author: > 80% of the heap is already consumed with shards-and-fields overhead

Not really. Now that I made it 1024B in particular, we vastly overestimate the direct per-field overhead. So for larger nodes, we will have about a 50%+ margin here now. If we recommend 4G heap for the fields in the example, then really the steady state memory usage from them is probably 20% of the heap tops leaving enough room for the other operations.
The 512M was mostly meant to add a little more margin for error and to get reasonable numbers for smaller nodes.

For example, holding 1000 indices that each contain 4000 fields will require
1000 × 4000 × 1024B = 4GB for the fields and another 512MB for a total of

> at least 4.5GB on the data node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
at least 4.5GB on the data node. As a reminder, 4.5GB heap here refers to holding the idling data 
in heap on the data node only. Heap usage on data nodes is also heavily dependent on use cases  
as well as how often these shards are indexed, updated or queried, and if there is heavy 
aggregation performed on the data nodes. The max number of shards a node can hold should be 
 adjusted by taking your usage pattern into consideration.
```

How can we emphasise this is for idling shards only? Maybe add a sentence like this?

heap memory.

Every mapped field also carries some overhead in terms of memory usage and disk
space. While the exact amount resource usage of each additional field depends

> on the type of field, an additional 1KB in memory use for each additional

Reviewer: nit

```suggestion
on the type of field, an additional 1kB in memory use for each additional
```

mapped field on data nodes is a good approximation in most cases.
As a result, the more mapped fields you have per index, the fewer
indices and shards each individual data node will be able to hold,
all other things being equal. In addition to the per field overhead you should
have heap available for the base Elasticsearch heap usage as well as the heap
usage of the workload. For a small workload, 512MB of heap in addition to the

> per field overhead suffice in many cases. For tight workloads, it is possible to

Reviewer: ```suggestion
per field overhead suffice in many cases. For light workloads, it may be possible to
```

go even lower.

> For example, holding 1000 indices that each contain 4000 fields will require

Reviewer: I sort of wonder whether the concrete figures given here should be another `Aim for` section below? Maybe later, just recording this thought for posterity here.

> Aim for 1000000 fields or fewer per GB of heap memory on data nodes, and account for overhead

> on the type of field, an additional 1024B in memory use  for each additional

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
on the type of field, an additional 1024B in memory used for each additional
```

Should this be `used` instead of `use`?  Also I removed an additional space.

Reviewer: Either is acceptable IMO ("memory use" works here as a nounal phrase)

Reviewer 3: Let's remove that extra space then.

mapped field on data nodes is a good approximation in most cases.
As a result, the more mapped fields you have per index, the fewer
indices and shards each individual data node will be able to hold,
all other things being equal. In addition to the per field overhead you should
at least have an additional 512MB of heap available per data node.

> For example, holding 1000 indices that each contain 4000 fields will require

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
For example, holding 1000 indices that each contains 4000 fields will require
```
Should this be contains following each being a singular?

Reviewer: Don't know how to explain this one, but `contain` is right to my ear. I might say "holding 1000 indices each containing 4000 fields" instead.

Reviewer: I looked it up: in this construction `each` is an adverb modifying the verb `contain` rather than being its subject. The indices are the subject, so the verb is plural.

> For example, holding 1000 indices that each contain 4000 fields will require

Reviewer 3: I think it's better to talk about a node holding 1000 shards not indices here for calculating heap usage?

```suggestion
For example, holding 1000 shards that each contain 4000 fields will require
```

Reviewer: How about something like `holding shards from 1000 different indices`? Mappers are shared across shards from the same index so adding multiple shards from each index doesn't add to this memory usage.

Reviewer 2: Is there not also a per shard overhead per field (in lucene)?

Author: > Is there not also a per shard overhead per field (in lucene)?

it's relatively small compared to the ES overhead for beats indices. Given that we now use a value of 1KB here that gives us a lot of breathing space I think we more than cover the Lucene overheads in most cases. I'd rather keep the per index documentation here as it applies to the vast majority of cases (and as far as I can tell at least for the Beats mappings, would even apply well for significant outliers with say 5 shards per the same index on a data node).

1000 × 4000 × 1024B = 4GB for the fields and another 512MB for a total of

> at least 4.5GB on the data node.

Reviewer 3: ```suggestion
at least 4.5GB heap or 9GB RAM on the data node.
```

I would prefer we call out the heap vs RAM carefully here.

Reviewer: +1 to mentioning heap, but I would rather not imply that RAM is always twice the heap. It's the heap size that matters here I think.

[discrete]
[[shard-count-recommendation]]
==== Aim for 3000 indices or fewer per GB of heap memory on master nodes

The number of indices a master node can manage is proportional to its heap
size. The exact amount of heap memory needed for each index depends on various
factors such as the size of the mapping and the number of shards per index.

Where possible, the master node will deduplicate the mapping metadata across
indices with identical mappings. Mapping metadata will be deduplicated across
indices which are created from the same index template and
<<explicit-mapping,do not use dynamic mapping updates>>.

> If your indices are are mostly created from a small number of templates and do

Reviewer 2: I think of something pretty simple and conservative. Perhaps just 1-2kb per field?

For dynamic mappings, it can make the impact of those very visible. Like you need a 1GB heap if you do not use them but a 30GB heap (or whatever the calculation says) if you use them. That can be a good motivation for a redesign?

Another case could be applications or search use cases using 100s of specific indices with specific mappings. They fall outside the above and we then leave them with no guidance. I think those cases will definitely also result in pretty small numbers anyway, but providing the guidance seems helpful.

> If your indices are are mostly created from a small number of templates and do

Reviewer: I think it might make sense to defer this until https://github.com/elastic/elasticsearch/issues/86639 is addressed - IMO it's too complicated to explain here how dynamic mappings might work with the deduplication mechanism.

> If your indices are are mostly created from a small number of templates and do

Reviewer 2: I would set it up as a worst-case with no deduplication. I agree that anything in between is hard, but providing a no-sharing guidance should be relatively easy? It puts an upper boundary on the no-sharing required heap-size.

> If your indices are are mostly created from a small number of templates and do

Author: > but providing a no-sharing guidance should be relatively easy? It puts an upper boundary on the no-sharing required heap-size.

But this totally depends on the size of the mappings used. Also, the effect of not sharing isn't as large as it is made out to be here I think. A compressed beats mapping for example is only *~6k*. So for 3k indices we're only talking about an 18M outright increase in the direct heap requirements for the master node. There's additional effects here from making stats APIs heavier without dedup, sending larger cluster states etc. but I find it very hard to capture these in a heap size number.

> If your indices are are mostly created from a small number of templates and do

Reviewer 2: We talked offline about this and it seems we could remove the deduplication assumption here, since it is in effect very little extra data on the masters and is more of a cpu concern than memory.

[discrete]
[[shard-count-recommendation]]
==== Aim for 3000 indices or fewer per GB of heap memory on master nodes

The number of indices a master node can manage is proportional to the node's
heap memory. The exact amount of heap memory each additional index requires

> depends on various factors. Theses include but are not limited to the size of its mapping,
> the number of shards per index or whether indices are created identically from the same
> template with no dynamic mapping involved.

Reviewer: slight rework suggestion here:

```suggestion
depends on various factors such as the size of the mapping and the number of
shards per index. Where possible, the master node will deduplicate the mapping
metadata across indices with identical mappings. Mapping metadata can be
deduplicated across indices that are created from the same index template as
long as they do not use dynamic mapping updates.
```

Author: ++ nice thanks, applied!

[discrete]
[[shard-count-recommendation]]
==== Aim for 3000 indices or fewer per GB of heap memory on master nodes

The number of indices a master node can manage is proportional to the node's
heap memory. The exact amount of heap memory each additional index requires
depends on various factors such as the size of the mapping and the number of
shards per index. Where possible, the master node will deduplicate the mapping
metadata across indices with identical mappings. Mapping metadata can be

> deduplicated across indices that are created from the same index template as

Author: We could pretty easily since mapping stats computation uses deduplication internally these days.

> deduplicated across indices that are created from the same index template as

Reviewer: :+1: should we do that before making these changes? It'd be a lot simpler to say "check this API" rather than just trying to explain the concepts in words.

> deduplicated across indices that are created from the same index template as

Author: I'd say we can adjust the docs here a little more when making those changes? IMO these changes still get us to a better spot than where we currently are and I'm not sure we should delay this that much more?

> deduplicated across indices that are created from the same index template as

Reviewer: Ok, I opened #86639 to track this.

long as they do not use dynamic mapping updates.
Under the assumption that indices are mostly created identically from a small number of templates
and no dynamic mapping updates are involved, a good rule of thumb is to aim for 3000 indices or

> fewer per GB of heap on master nodes. For example, if your cluster contains 12,000 indices then

Reviewer 3: Can we explicitly call out that the rule of thumb here refers to an index having 1 primary and 1 replica shards?

[discrete]
[[shard-count-recommendation]]
==== Aim for 20 shards or fewer per GB of heap memory

The number of shards a data node can hold is proportional to the node's heap
memory. For example, a node with 30GB of heap memory should have at most 600
shards. The further below this limit you can keep your nodes, the better. If
you find your nodes exceeding more than 20 shards per GB, consider adding
another node.

Some system indices for {enterprise-search-ref}/index.html[Enterprise Search]
are nearly empty and rarely used. Due to their low overhead, you shouldn't
count shards for these indices toward a node's shard limit.

To check the current size of each node's heap, use the <<cat-nodes,cat nodes
API>>.

[source,console]
----

> GET _cat/nodes?v=true&h=heap.current

Reviewer: I think it'd be helpful to keep these commands here.

Author: Sure brought them back. The shard per node count thing seemed a little off now but you're right these are still helpful :)

> the number of shards per index or whether its mapping is shared with other indices.

Reviewer 2: > whether its mapping is shared with other indices.
I wonder if we could formulate this in less implementation detailed way as `whether indices are created identically from the same template with no dynamic mapping involved`?

Author: Reworded

> A good rule of thumb is to aim for 3000 indices or fewer per GB of heap on master nodes.

Reviewer 2: Can we put a few preconditions on this rule of thumb, like less than 1000 fields and with most indices created identically from the same template?

Author: These numbers are taken from Beats indices which do indeed come with 4.x k fields on average. The field count really doesn't matter much here, what matters is mostly that mappings are shared. Added a comment to that effect that also mentions the dynamic mapping updates now.

> For example, if your cluster contains 12,000 indices and each master node should have

Reviewer: ```suggestion
For example, if your cluster contains 12,000 indices then each dedicated master node should have
```

for non-dedicated masters should we say something about allowing for this much overhead too?

Author: My assumption was that once these numbers start to matter you'd be using dedicated master nodes anyway?
The overhead is definitely quite a bit less if you're on a non-dedicated master node because you share network buffers and such with other operations I'd say. Maybe better to add a line recommending dedicated masters here above say 5k indices or so instead?

Reviewer: Not sure, that seems a pretty low threshold to be going for dedicated masters and quite possibly the wrong variable to choose too. A 3x31GiB cluster with enough CPU to spare should be able to deal with more than 5k indices, and probably better to stick with 3 big nodes rather than add 3 tiny masters on top?

Author: >  A 3x31GiB cluster with enough CPU to spare should be able to deal with more than 5k indices, and probably better to stick with 3 big nodes rather than add 3 tiny masters on top?

Yea probably in most cases (disks would be my biggest worry here but with much more CS batching nowadays it's less of an issue probably). I think I'd keep it simple then and really just state that the numbers must be added for non-dedicated master nodes even if it's a little pessimistic heap wise if that's ok?

Reviewer: sounds good to me

----
// TEST[setup:my_index]

[discrete]
[[field-count-recommendation]]
==== Allow 1kB of heap per field per index on data nodes, plus overheads

The exact resource usage of each mapped field depends on its type, but in many

> cases you should allow approximately 1kB of heap overhead per mapped field per

Author: Sure reworded :)

> cases you should allow approximately 1kB of heap overhead per mapped field per

Author: Between the start of this PR and now I believe I almost halved the overhead per mapper through various fixes :D IMO we have a massive margin here already. 8.5G for 1k indices is complete overkill when the measured idle state heap usage of 10k Beats indices is under 4G now => I wouldn't be more pessimistic here :)

> cases you should allow approximately 1kB of heap overhead per mapped field per

Reviewer 2: It sounds good to me with those numbers though I am still worried about the massiveness of the change. It is probably mostly around the workload then, i.e., the old guidance included the ability to search and aggregate (to some extent), perhaps we can elaborate a bit on the 0.5GB added for workload to say that heavy workloads may require more (it is implicit today in the wording). 

Are all those improvements you mention in 8.3?

> cases you should allow approximately 1kB of heap overhead per mapped field per

Author: Sure, added a few words for the heavy workloads case now :)

> Are all those improvements you mention in 8.3?

Yes.
